<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>PROEM</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
				<h2 class="c004" id="PROEM">PROEM</h2>
			</div>
			<div class="c005 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>In dark and early ages, through the primal forests faring,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Ere the soul came shining into prehistoric night,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Twofold man was equal; they were comrades dear and daring,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Living wild and free together in unreasoning delight.</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>Ere the soul was born and consciousness came slowly,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Ere the soul was born, to man and woman, too,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Ere he found the Tree of Knowledge, that awful tree and holy,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Ere he knew he felt, and knew he knew.</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>Then said he to Pain, “I am wise now, and I know you!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>No more will I suffer while power and wisdom last!”</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Then said he to Pleasure, “I am strong, and I will show you</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>That the will of man can seize you⁠—aye, and hold you fast!”</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>Food he ate for pleasure, and wine he drank for gladness.</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>And woman? Ah, the woman! the crown of all delight!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>His now⁠—he knew it! He was strong to madness</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>In that early dawning after prehistoric night.</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>His⁠—his forever! That glory sweet and tender!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Ah, but he would love her! And she should love but him!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>He would work and struggle for her, he would shelter and defend her⁠—</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>She should never leave him, never, till their eyes in death were dim.</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>Close, close he bound her, that she should leave him never;</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Weak still he kept her, lest she be strong to flee;</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>And the fainting flame of passion he kept alive forever</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>With all the arts and forces of earth and sky and sea.</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>And, ah, the long journey! The slow and awful ages</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>They have labored up together, blind and crippled, all astray!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Through what a mighty volume, with a million shameful pages,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>From the freedom of the forests to the prisons of to-day!</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>Food he ate for pleasure, and it slew him with diseases!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Wine he drank for gladness, and it led the way to crime!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>And woman? He will hold her⁠—he will have her when he pleases⁠—</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>And he never once hath seen her since the prehistoric time!</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>Gone the friend and comrade of the day when life was younger,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>She who rests and comforts, she who helps and saves.</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Still he seeks her vainly, with a never-dying hunger;</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Alone beneath his tyrants, alone above his slaves!</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>Toiler, bent and weary with the load of thine own making!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Thou who art sad and lonely, though lonely all in vain!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Who hast sought to conquer Pleasure and have her for the taking,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line"><i>And found that Pleasure only was another name for Pain</i>⁠—</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>Nature hath reclaimed thee, forgiving dispossession!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>God hath not forgotten, though man doth still forget!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>The woman-soul is rising, in despite of thy transgression⁠—</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Loose her now, and trust her! She will love thee yet!</i>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">
							<i>Love thee? She will love thee as only freedom knoweth!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Love thee? She will love thee while Love itself doth live!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>Fear not the heart of woman! No bitterness it showeth!</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>The ages of her sorrow have but taught her to forgive!</i>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
